Dal Lake

Dal Lake is a lake in Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir. The urban lake, which is the second largest in 
the state, is integral to tourism and recreation in Kashmir and is named the "Jewel in the crown of Kashmir or "Srinagar's
 Jewel. The lake is also an important source for commercial operations in fishing and water plant harvesting.
At present, the Dal Lake and its Mughal gardens, Shalimar Bagh and the Nishat Bagh on

The shore line of is encompassed by a boulevard lined with Mughal era gardens, parks, houseboats and hotels. Scenic views
 of the lake can be witnessed from the shore line Mughal gardens, such as Shalimar Bagh and Nishat Bagh built during the 
reign of Mughal Emperor Jahangir[6] and from houseboats cruising along the lake in the colourful shikaras.

The lake covers an area of 18 square kilometres (6.9 sq mi) and is part of a natural wetland which covers 21.1 square 
kilometres (8.1 sq mi), including its floating gardens. The floating gardens, known as "Rad" in Kashmiri, blossom with 
lotus flowers during July and August. The wetland is divided by causeways into four basins; Gagribal, Lokut Dal, Bod Dal 
and Nagin (although Nagin is also considered as an independent lake). Lokut-dal and Bod-dal each have an island in the 
centre, known as Rup Lank (or Char Chinari) and Sona Lank respectively.[8][9]







HISTORY





Dal Lake is the traditional lake of kashmir

Dal lake is mentioned as Mahasarit in ancient Sanskrit texts. Ancient history records mention that a village named Isabar
 to the east of Dal Lake was the residence of goddess Durga.[citation needed] This place was known as Sureshwari on the 
bank of the lake, which was sourced by a spring called the Satadhara.

During the Mughal period, the Mughal rulers of India designated Kashmir, Srinagar in particular, as their summer resort. 
They developed the precincts of the Dal lake in Srinagar with sprawling Mughal-type gardens and pavilions as pleasure 
resorts to enjoy the salubrious cool climate.[2] After the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, which led to the disintegration 
of the Mughal Empire,[13] Pashtun tribes in the area around the lake and city increased, and the Durrani Empire ruled the 
city for several decades. In 1814 a significant part of the Kashmir valley, including Srinagar, was annexed by Raja Ranjit
 Singh to his kingdom, and the Sikhs grew in influence in the region for 27 years.

Nishat Bagh Mughal Gardens

During the British Raj, the British also made Srinagar their capital during the summer months, attracted by the cool climate of the Kashmir valley, amidst the back drop of the majestic snow covered Himalayan ranges. The lake precincts experience temperatures in the range of 1–11 °C (34–52 °F) during winter and 12–30 °C (54–86 °F) during the summer season. The lake freezes when temperatures drop to about -11 °C (12 °F) during severe winter.[5] Although the Dogra Maharaja of Kashmir restricted the building of houses in the valley, the British circumvented this rule by commissioning lavish houseboats to be built on the Dal Lake. The houseboats have been referred to as, "each one a little piece of England afloat on Dal Lake.

After the independence of India, the Kashmiri Hanji people have built, owned and maintained these houseboats, cultivating floating gardens and producing commodities for the market, making them the centre of their livelihoods. The houseboats, closely associated with Dal Lake also provide accommodation in Srinagar. Following the Mughal and British rule, the place has earned the epithet, "Jewel in the crown of Kashmir"